Input output guide (#144)
leaningtech/labs: sites/cheerpx/src/content/docs/11-guides/input-output.md

To make a file accessible, you can copy files using commands within the virtual machine. Here’s an example on how to do it:

```js
const filesDevice = await CheerpX.IDBDevice.create("files");
const cx = await CheerpX.Linux.create({
	// Mount the IDBDevice
	mounts: [
		{ type: "ext2", path: "/", dev: overlayDevice },
		{ type: "dir", path: "/files", dev: filesDevice },
	],
});
```

Now, you can copy files as follows:

```js
await cx.run("/bin/cp", ["/source_file", "/destination_file"]);
```

### Redirecting Output to a File

To capture output from a program, you can redirect it to a file. Here’s how to do that:

1. Run your program using `bash -c`, redirecting stdout to a file:

```js
await cx.run("/bin/bash", ["-c", "echo 'Output to capture' > /output.txt"]);
```

2. Read the Output File:

After the program finishes, you can read the contents of the output file:

```js
const outputBlob = await filesDevice.readFileAsBlob("/output.txt");
console.log(await outputBlob.text());
```

> > [!NOTE]

Reviewer: This does not render as expected. See `File-System-support.md` for reference
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ca64d7c6-e1ce-4986-8188-7852067f6e92)

> > [!note]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!note] Note
```

There should always be a title for this blocks, for stylistic consistency. This is the last thing.

	accumulatedOutput += string; // Accumulate the output
	console.log(accumulatedOutput); // log the accumulated output
});

// Send a string
const str = "Hello, custom console!\n";
const encodedStr = encoder.encode(str);

for (let i = 0; i < encodedStr.length; i++) {
	send(encodedStr[i]);
}
```

For more details on customizing the console, see [CheerpX Custom console].

## Reading Files Using IDBDevice and Redirecting Output

`IDBDevice` provides a persistent, read-write filesystem using the browser’s IndexedDB. It’s ideal for storing data that should persist between sessions. You can use the `readFileAsBlob` method to read files from an `IDBDevice` as Blob objects.

To make a file accessible, you can copy files using commands within the virtual machine. Here’s an example on how to do it:

```js
const filesDevice = await CheerpX.IDBDevice.create("files");
const cx = await CheerpX.Linux.create({
	// Mount the IDBDevice
	mounts: [
		{ type: "ext2", path: "/", dev: overlayDevice },
		{ type: "dir", path: "/files", dev: filesDevice },
	],
});
```

Now, you can copy files as follows:

```js
await cx.run("/bin/cp", ["/source_file", "/files/destination_file"], {

> 	env: [

Reviewer: Neither env, nor cwd are required. You can completely remove the optional arguments.

---

> title: input and output CheerpX

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Input and output
```

> description: Summarization on how to get data in and out of CheerpX VM

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Techniques for getting data in and out of CheerpX virtual machine
```

---

## CheerpX console input and output

> CheerpX provides two options for handling console input and output: the `built-in` console and a `custom` console. The purpose of these consoles are to interact with the running application, execute commands and, view output. The custom console allows you to create an interface that fits the specific needs of your application.

Reviewer: Prefer _italics_ to `code` for built-in and custom. We should only use the `code` markers for names which corresponds to APIs

> CheerpX provides two options for handling console input and output: the `built-in` console and a `custom` console. The purpose of these consoles are to interact with the running application, execute commands and, view output. The custom console allows you to create an interface that fits the specific needs of your application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CheerpX provides two options for handling console input and output: the `built-in` console and a `custom` console. The purpose of the console is to interact with the running application via standard input and output..
```

**Built-in console**

> The CheerpX VM comes with a `built-in` console that mimics traditional console behavior. The `built-in` console in CheerpX allows for standard input and output operations, similar to typical command-line environments. You can use standard I/O functions like printf and scanf within your C/C++ programs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CheerpX comes with a _built-in_ console that mimics traditional console behavior. The _built-in_ console in CheerpX allows for standard input and output operations, similar to typical command-line environments. You can use standard I/O functions like printf and scanf within your C/C++ programs.
```

> For more information, visit the [CheerpX console].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information, visit the [CheerpX console] reference.
```

> **Custom console**

Reviewer: Should this be ### titles?

> CheerpX also supports a `custom` console that allows developers to capture output programmatically. This feature enables you to accumulate program output into a JavaScript string. You can implement your `custom` logging mechanism to redirect the output to a variable, which can be manipulated or displayed as needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CheerpX also supports a `custom` console that allows developers to capture output, and provide input, programmatically. This feature is useful to integrate with a more complete terminal implementation such as  xterm.js [TODO ADD LINK TO LIB]. We use xterm.js ourselves for our public WebVM environment.

Another possible use for the custom console it accumulating program output into a JavaScript string. You can achieve this with the following snippet [ADD CODE, this is not documented elsewhere]
```

For more details on customizing the console, see [CheerpX Custom console].

## Reading Data from the Filesystem using IDBDevice.readFileAsBlob

`IDBDevice` provides a persistent, read-write filesystem using the browser’s IndexedDB. It’s ideal for storing data that should persist between sessions. You can use the `readFileAsBlob` method to read files from an IDBDevice as Blob objects.

> You can copy files from various filesystems into the `IDBDevice`. This allows you to make these files accesible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the file you want to read is not yet in an `IDBDevice`, you can copy files by running commands inside the virtual machine to make them accessible. [ADD AN EXAMPLE, e.g. using `cp` via `cx.run`]

For more on IDBDevice operations, see the [CheerpX IDBDevice].

## Accessing JS Data in the Filesystem via DataDevice

> The `DataDevice` in CheerpX allows access to JavaScript data in the filesystem. This device can interact with data stored in memory or other JavaScript objects. It is particularly useful for transferring data between JavaScript and the compiled C/C++ code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `DataDevice` in CheerpX allows access to JavaScript data from the filesystem. This device can read-only access to `Uint8Array`s and JavaScript `Strings`s. It is particularly useful for transferring data from JavaScript to processes running in CheerpX.
```

For more information, see the [CheerpX DataDevice].

## Capture stdout from a program running in CheerpX

Currently, CheerpX doesn't directly support capturing stdout from running programs. Therefore, The IDBDevice allows you to use `.readFileAsBlob()` for capturing stdout after redirecting stdout to a file in `bash`. You can then read this file as a Blob.

> For more information on capturing stdout, see [Frequently Asked Questions].

Reviewer: Move the whole answer outside of the FAQ, this document is a much better place for it. Also integrated it with the previously mentioned solution of using a custom console.

---
title: Input and output

> description: Techniques for getting data in and out of CheerpX virtual machine

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Techniques for getting data in and out of the CheerpX virtual machine
```

---

## CheerpX console input and output

> CheerpX provides two options for handling console input and output: the _built-in_ console and a _custom_ console. The purpose of the console is to interact with the running application via standard input and output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CheerpX provides two options for handling console input and output: a _built-in_ console and a _custom_ console. The purpose of the console is to interact with the running application via standard input and output.
```

### Built-in console

> CheerpX comes with a _built-in_ console that mimics traditional console behavior. The _built-in_ console in CheerpX allows for standard input and output operations, similar to typical command-line environments. You can use standard I/O functions like printf and scanf within your C/C++ programs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CheerpX comes with a _built-in_ console that mimics traditional console behavior. The _built-in_ console supports  standard input and output over a HTML `<pre>` (pre-formatted) element. Keyboard input works provided the element is in focus.
```

For more information, visit the [CheerpX console] reference.

### Custom console

> ---

Reviewer: These line breaks should not be here

> CheerpX also supports a _custom_ console that allows developers to capture output, and provide input, programmatically. This feature is useful to integrate with a more complete terminal implementation such as [xterm.js]. We use xterm.js ourselves for our public WebVM environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CheerpX also supports a _custom_ console that allows developers to programmatically capture output and provide input. This feature is useful to integrate with a more complete terminal implementation such as [xterm.js]. We use xterm.js ourselves for our public WebVM environment.
```

Another possible use for the custom console it accumulating program output into a JavaScript string. You can achieve this with the following snippet:

> [ADD CODE]

Reviewer: Indeed, add the relevant code which implement this functionality

---

For more details on customizing the console, see [CheerpX Custom console].

> ## Reading Data from the Filesystem using IDBDevice.readFileAsBlob

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Reading files using IDBDevice.readFileAsBlob
```

`IDBDevice` provides a persistent, read-write filesystem using the browser’s IndexedDB. It’s ideal for storing data that should persist between sessions. You can use the `readFileAsBlob` method to read files from an IDBDevice as Blob objects.

---

If the file you want to read is not yet in an `IDBDevice`, you can copy files by running commands inside the virtual machine to make them accessible.

> [ADD AN EXAMPLE]

Reviewer: Indeed, add an example

---

For more on IDBDevice operations, see the [CheerpX IDBDevice].

## Accessing JS Data in the Filesystem via DataDevice

> The `DataDevice` in CheerpX allows access to JavaScript data from the filesystem. This device can read-only access to `Uint8Array`s and JavaScript `Strings`s. It is particularly useful for transferring data from JavaScript to processes running in CheerpX.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `DataDevice` in CheerpX exposes JavaScript data in the filesystem. This device provides read-only access to `Uint8Array`s and JavaScript `Strings`s. It is particularly useful for transferring data from JavaScript to programs running in CheerpX.
```

For more information, see the [CheerpX DataDevice].

## Capture stdout from a program running in CheerpX

> Currently, CheerpX doesn't directly support capturing stdout from running programs. Therefore, The IDBDevice allows you to use `.readFileAsBlob()` for capturing stdout after redirecting stdout to a file in `bash`. You can then read this file as a Blob.

Reviewer: To be clear, we should move the answer from the FAQ to this document
